Hello everyone and welcome to this new hands on Project
on interactive data visualization with Plot li Express.
My name is Ryan Ahmed and I will be your instructor
for this course.
I hold the Masters of Applied Science and a PhD degrees
in Engineering from McMaster University in Ontario Canada.
I taught over a quarter of a million students online
from over 160 countries.
In this crash course we are going to use Plot li Express,
which is a super powerful python package that empowers anyone
to create, manipulate and render graphical figures.
This crash course is very practical and directly applicable
to many industries such as banking, finance and tech
industries.
So you guys can add this project to your portfolio
of projects which is essential for your next job interview
for those of you guys who are new to rhyme, rhyme is
an online platform for hands on projects creation.
It will allow you to learn by doing so on the right hand side,
you should see the recorded videos, you can pause the video
at any time you want.
And on the left hand side you will see rhymes virtual machine
simply.
It's a pre configured cloud desktop with all the software pre
installed and ready for you to use.
So you don't have to worry about any installations
or any issues.
Just go ahead.
Follow along and code with me.
Please note that this project is a beginner level and it has
basic prerequisites.
It requires basic python programming capabilities.
Okay, so let's go ahead and get started.
So what you guys can see here is you should be able to see
a jupiter notebook entitled crash course on interactive data
visualization with plot we express.
So in this notebook I've included everything you need.
So you guys should be able to see the code scripts.
Also, you will be able to see a ton of many challenges
along the way and also the solutions out of these many
challenges.
Everything is contained in this notebook in here.
In addition to that, I've also included all the data that we
will be working with in this project.
So here I have a list of CSP files entitled crypto prices,
we have employeessalaries information, we're going to also
work with Gap Minder, gonna explain that later on.
We're also going to deal with restaurant data as well as well
as university admission data set.
So what I want, what I want you guys to do is to please go
ahead and click on this jupiter notebook here and it should
open separately in a new tab and it might take, I would say
a couple of seconds for it to open.
But again, as I mentioned, I've included everything
in this notebook in here.
Okay, so I've divided this notebook into a series of tasks.
So let me walk you through the entire notebook.
So in task one we will learn how to plot interactive
scattered plots using plot we express.
And if you guys scroll down here, you should be able to see
the kind of plots that we will be able to generate and please
note that in every task, I have added a mini challenge
for you guys.
So after task one, I've included many challenge
one and I'm going to for example ask you to plot a scatter
plot using a new data set and if you guys crawl down
to the end to the bottom of the notebook, I've included
the solutions for every single minute challenge.
So many challenge solutions here, I have many challenge
number one solution to solution and all the solutions are
available in here for us.
But please I highly recommend that you guys do not look
at the many challenges solutions an attempt to solve
these many challenges on your own.
And basically I'm going to ask you to pause the video, give
it a shot and please afterwards you can go ahead and compare
your answers to the answer sheet that I got at the end
of the notebook.
Okay. In task to we will learn how to plot interactive bubble
charts or essentially scatter plots with size associated
with it.
And these are the kind of plots that will be able to generate.
And in task number three we learn how to plot interactive
single line plot with plot we express.
So we'll be able to visualize data about cryptocurrencies.
So we'll be able to visualize Bitcoin prices, a Syrian prices
and light coin prices as well.
And in task Force we learn how to plot multiple interactive
multiple plots.
And then in Task five we will plot interactive pie charts.
And again as promised you guys were able to see many
challenges in every single task.
And then in task six will learn how to plot interactive bar
chart, something that looks like that here and also how
to color code as well, the bar chart to and then in task
seven we learn how to plot gant chart and again many
challenge along the way.
Mini Challenge seven.
And then in task eight we learn how to plot what we call it
the sun burst which is really cool plot that looks
like that will also learn how to plot it as well.
And that should simply going to conclude our project.
And what I want you guys to do right now is let's go ahead
and actually start with our first task.
So if you guys scroll up to here, what we're gonna do is
we learn how to first import our plot we express library
and the next we'll learn how to plot interactive scatter
plots. So on your machine, on your virtual machine, you
should be able to run this code with no issues because again,
this is an exact copy of what I'm running on my machine as
well. But in case if you guys wanted to run this code,
for example, on a separate machine, I want you guys to make
sure that we installed plot li so to do that, you guys need
to remove the hashtag here and just go ahead and run the cell.
And again, you guys only need to do that if you're running
this notebook on your machine on a different machine.
But if you guys are using grime, you don't have to do
anything at all.
Just go back and add your hashtag here and don't worry
about the cell at all.
Okay, so the question is, what is plot li so as I mentioned,
plot li python package essentially empowers anyone to create
really powerful graphical figures and they are
all interactive, which is really powerful.
So what we're gonna do is I'm going to show you guys a ton
of plots such as cattle plot, such as pie charts, bar charts
and so on.
And all of that will be written with simple lines of code.
Okay, so let me show you guys the first step, what
we're going to do first is I want to first import our plot li
express library.
So to do that, I'm going to say import and I want you guys
to please go ahead and code along with me.
So please write import and then right Claude lee dot express
as P x.
And that's simply the short version of plot we express.
So essentially we're going to refer to plot the Express
with PX throughout the entire code and then I'm going
to say import pandas as Pd and pandas is primarily going
to be we're going to be using it for data frame manipulations.
Think of it as more of an excel in python.
Okay. So to execute around the cell, you guys can go ahead
and press on the keyboard, shift and enter.
So shift and enter should be able to execute around the cell.
And what you guys see here is that there is an asterisk
or star indicating that this cell is being executed right now,
once it's done, once it has been successfully executed, you
should be able to see that this has been converted
into a number essentially.
So again, it's taking some time for it to run.
Might take like 30 seconds or so, but once it's over, you
guys should be able to see a number in here.
Okay. The next step is I wanted to import my first data sets
and the first data that we're going to import is we're going
to import the employee salaries information.
So what I see here now, the cell has been executed
successfully so now I can go ahead and essentially import my
data. So I'm going to say salary underscore d f
and that will be my data frame that includes information.
I'm going to use pandas dot read c s V to read my data.
So I'm going to say PB dot read underscore c s v u open
parentheses and then you need to specify the name of the c S
V File that you wanted to read.
So if you guys go back to here to the main browser here, you
should be able to see that here.
I have employee underscore salaries the C. S. V.
And that simply is going to be my C. S. V.
File that I'm going to import.
So here I'm going to say employee employee underscored
salaries dot C. S. V.
And that's it.
That's simply how do we import the data?
And if you guys wanted to view the salary D. F. I can say
salary underscored the F.
And that simply is going to be my data frame that contains
all the information.
So right now if you press shift and enter, so once you run
the cell you should be able to see the salary D. F.
And essentially it's very simple data set that contains
two columns here.
I have the number of years of experience and here I have
the salad information and all I wanted to do next is I wanted
to plot the X.
Versus Y. I just wanted to plot the years of experience
on the X. Axis and the salary information on the Y axis.
And let's see what's going to happen.
So in order to do that I'm going to use plot.
We express and simply a plot we express is the we call it
the entry level library to plot li so it's essentially a very
simple way of leveraging plot li without learning
like a complicated code.
It's really simple and I'm going to show you guys
with one single line of code.
We should be able to plot really powerful plots.
And they are interactive as well.
So let me show you how we can do that.
I'm going to say fig equals two.
And in order to or use plot, we express I need to say P. X.
Which stands for plot li express dot scatter which stands
for cattle plot, open parentheses.
And then you need to specify what would be the data frame.
What is the source of the data, What do you want to plot
on the X axis and what do you want to plot on the Y axis?
And that's it, that's all what you need.
So the data is salary underscored the f that's the data frame
that we imported earlier.
You guys can see if you guys remember here and I need
to specify what was going to be on the X axis chroma and what
do I need to plot on the Y axis, That's all it is.
So on the X axis, I need to specify that in quotation marks.
And if you guys go up, you should be able to see
that this column here is entitled Years of Experience.
So I'm just going to write that.
I'm going to say years underscore of underscore experience.
And on the y axis I need to plot simply the salary
information.
So I'm going to say salary information and next what I wanted
to do is I wanted to take that fig object and just show it.
So I'm gonna say fig dot show and open parentheses.
If you press shift and enter right now, what you guys
should be able to see.
It's taking some time for the two run.
You should be able to see our first scatter plot using plot
we express and here we go.
What you guys can see here is that we have been able
to plot is cattle plot essentially every X and Y point
that I have in here.
Like this point at this point, these are X and Y coordinates.
All of these have been represented by a point in here on my
scatter plot and what's super powerful about plot lee and I
really actually like it.
This is more of a dynamic interactive plot, meaning that you
guys can go ahead and zoom in as well and explored the plot.
So you can, you guys can see here is they can see all
the different interactions.
So you can see in every point it has a number of years
of experience versus the salary information as well.
What you can also do is that you can go ahead and auto scale
and that should scale it back to its original forum and there
are tons of options available for you here.
If you wanted to zoom in.
For example, you can go ahead.
Oops, let's go ahead and actually zoom out first.
So I'm just gonna go to scale and what you guys can do is
they can go ahead here and zoom in as well.
You can also zoom out.
You can also export as well.
Your, your graph if you wanted to include it in a report
for example, and there are tons of options available here
and I'm going to cover them in details throughout the entire
project.
But if you wanted to go to scale, that will be the most
common one.
That will auto scale my graph again back to normal.
Okay, so the next step that I wanted to do is I wanted
to show you guys what if we decided to import maybe a little
bit complex or maybe a little bit advanced data set
and that should set us up to our first mini challenge which
is many challenge number one coming up.
So I wanted to go ahead and import another data which
is going to be my university admission dot c S V data.
So in order to import that I'm going to say well admission
underscore the F equals two.
I'm going to use pandas as well, so I'm gonna say pd dot read
underscore c S V open parenthesis.
And I'm going to specify.
The data will be my university underscore admission dot c S V.
Let's go ahead and visualize the admission and the score.
The F. It's not going to say admission again.
The F people are shift and enter.
Here we go.
It's simply the a little bit more advanced data set as
compared to the employee's salary data set.
And here we have our G R. E score toefel score, university
rating here I have the statement of purpose which is how
strong the statement of purpose is.
And this data set is essentially used primarily for machine
learning applications.
And it's primarily used to predict this column here, which is
my chances of admission.
So basically I wanted to know be given a student profile
like his his or her G. R. E.
Score toefel score rating.
What's the how strong their statement of purpose is?
What is the letter of recommendations?
What's your G. P.
A. And if they have done research or not, all
of that information is being captured and we wanted
to predict the chances of admission.
Okay, all right, so now it's time for our first minute
challenge.
What I want you guys to do is I want you to plot this cattle
plot for the G. R. S.
Core versus the chances of admission.
I want you to tell me what do you infer or kind of get out
of that plot?
What do you like?
What information we can obtain from that plot?
And I want you to also use the color attribute to show
the university rating as a third dimension
and that might need a little bit of external research
and that's what I want you guys to do.
I wanted to kind of stretch your limits and explore as well
how to add color attributes in plot.
We express please go ahead, pause the video, give it a shot
and I will see you guys after the challenge.
All right.
I hope you guys were able to figure out the mini challenge.
What I asked you guys to do is to please go ahead and just
plot the GRS core versus the chances of admission.
All what you need to do is you need to say fig equals two PX
dot scatter.
And then you need to say you open parentheses.
You need to specify what data that you're interested in,
which is admission underscored the F and then you need
to specify what do you want to plot on the X axis and what do
you want to plot on the Y axis, on the X axis?
I have my G R E score on the y axis.
I wanted to plot the chances of admission.
So here I'm going to say why is equal still my chances
of admissions are going to be chance of admit and then what
you need to do next is you need to just say fig dot co
two essentially show the plots were going to say fig dot show
the open parentheses and that's it.
If you press shift and enter, that should simply is going
to run our data set and here we go, what you guys can see
here is I was able to plot the GRS core versus the chances
of admission and of course what you infer from the graph is
as the G r E score increases, most likely the chances
of admission tend to increase as well of these students
and as well in order to insert a new cell, you can go ahead
and press a and that should insert a new cell here as well.
And what you guys need to do is to simply copy this code here
as is so just gonna copy that right click and click copy,
come here and paste it here, right click and then paste.
And all I need to do is I need to add an additional
attributes and that will be my color attributes are gonna say
color liquids to and I ask you guys to add the university
rating.
So going to say university they think and that will be my
additional color attributes.
You press shift and enter.
You should be able to see here that we have been added
a third dimension to our plot.
So what I have my G R. E score here, I have my chances
of admission and now I added the university relating on top
of it. So basically the color code indicates that the more
yellow color indicates a high university rating which makes
sense. As student GRS score increases as the university
rating increases, their chances of admission
to the university increases as well, which makes complete
sense. All right, okay.
So that's simply all I have for task number one.
I hope you guys enjoyed it in task number two.
Let's go ahead and plot interactive bubble charts.
Please go ahead.
Please stay tuned.
Best of luck and I will see you guys in the next desk.